.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt buildswirl 1
.Os Debian sid
.Sh NAME
.Nm buildswirl
.Nd build a swirl package
.
.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm ./buildswirl
.Pa swirls/<swirlname>
.Op checksum
.Nm cd swirls/<swirlname> && ../../buildswirl $PWD
.Op checksum
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.
.
This manual assumes you have followed the "QuickStart" instructions at
.Xr swirlbuild 7 .
.
.Pp
The
.Nm
utility builds a Debian package for a given
.Ar swirlname ,
in your
.Pa $SWIRLBUILD/repository
directory, and then updates the necessary files to make that directory a
basic Debian repository.
.Pp
When applicable,
.Nm
will build dbgsym (debug symbols) packages, and will make them available in the
repository.
.
.
.Sh OPTIONS
.
.
.Bl -tag -width packages
.
.It Va checksum
.Pp
If it is appended to the command line,
.Nm
will download all the source files necessary to build the swirl, compute their
checksums, and then create a
.Pa $SWIRLBUILD/<swirlname>/sha512sum
file with them, provided that it does not exist.
.Pp
If
.Pa $SWIRLBUILD/<swirlname>/sha512sum
exists, it will quit immediatly.
.Pp
This option should not be used if you do not intend to create or maintain a
swirl.
.
.El
.
.
.Sh MANUALLY UPDATING THE REPOSITORY, MOVED/DELETED REPOSITORY
.
.
.Pp
If you removed a package from the repository, the
.Pa Packages
and/or the
.Pa Release
files, the repository itself or added a third party deb package, you
must update the metadata, otherwise
.Xr apt 8
will error out.
.Pp
To do so, you can issue:
.Pp
.Bd -literal
$SWIRLBUILD/infrastructure/bin/repoupdate $SWIRLBUILD/repository
.Ed
.Pp
The same applies if you moved the $SWIRLBUILD tree or the $SWIRLBUILD/repository
directory.
.Pp
In case your intention is to not use swirlbuild and its repository anymore,
you just need to remove the
.Pa /etc/apt/sources.list.d/swirlpkg.list
file as root to unlock the situation.
.
.
.Sh MAINTENANCE
.
.
.Ss pbuilder
.Pp
.Xr pbuilder 8
has its own
.Xr apt 8
cache and packages store, that can be cleaned by using:
.Bd -literal
sudo pbuilder clean
sudo rm /var/cache/pbuilder/result/*
.Ed
.
.Ss distfiles, logs and repository
.Bl -tag -width packages
.
.It Pa $SWIRLBUILD/distfiles
.Pp
contains the downloaded sources of the swirl you have built. It can safely be
removed, but at the next build sources will be downloaded again.
.
.It Pa $SWIRLBUILD/logs
.Pp
contains the logs generated during swirl builds. This can be safely removed.
.
.It Pa $SWIRLBUILD/repository
.Pp
Your local repository directory.
.Nm
does not remove old packages, and there are no official way to do so, but
$WEBSEARCHENGINE has some proposals. The
.Pa Release
and
.Pa Packages
files should never be removed.
.Pp
After you are done, you must proceed as described in
.Sx MANUALLY UPDATING THE REPOSITORY, MOVED/DELETED REPOSITORY
.El
.
.
.Sh FILES
.
.
.Bl -tag -width packages
.It Pa $SWIRLBUILD/myswirls
.Pp
Files included in this directory are not tracked by
.Xr git 1 .
If you want to put personal swirls inside your copy of the
.Nm
repository, you can put them there.
.
.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.
.
.Ex -std
.
.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.
.
.Bl -tag -width packages
.It Ev MAKE_JOBS
.Pp
This variable can be used if it is not specified in the buildfile, and will
define the numbers of parallel jobs during various steps of the build. This may
be useful if you are out of memory during a build. It may be overriden by a
swirl if we have found out that a single job takes 4GB of memory or more,
with a value of 1, which is rarely the case.
.El
.
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.
.Pp
If it is the first time you are using
.Nm ,
it is recommended to read its intro at
.Xr swirlbuild 7 .
.
.Pp
The packager reference is available at
.Xr swirlbuild 5 .
.
.
.Sh SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
.
.
.Pp
A swirl is mostly composed of files that will be executed on your computer.
Among others,
.Pa debian/rules
and
.Pa build
are executed. Be careful to always download a swirl from a trusted source, or
review the swirl to ensure no malicious code is executed.
.
.
.Sh CAVEATS
.
.
Using the
.Pa swirls/
directory is a convention, actually
.Nm
should be able to work with any directory provided.
